<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 27</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
			<p>Peredonov awoke in the morning. Someone was looking at him with huge, cloudy, four-cornered eyes. Wasn’t it Pilnikov? Peredonov walked up to the window and spat on the evil apparition. Everything seemed bewitched. The wild nedotikomka squealed and the people and the beasts looked malignantly and craftily at Peredonov. Everything was hostile to him, he was one against all. During lessons at the gymnasia Peredonov slandered his colleagues, the Head-Master, the parents and the pupils. The students listened to him in astonishment. Some, vulgarians by nature, truckled to Peredonov and showed their sympathy with him. Others remained gravely silent or defended their parents hotly, when Peredonov assailed them. Peredonov looked morosely and timorously on these boys, and avoided them, muttering something to himself.</p>
			<p>At some of the lessons Peredonov amused his pupils by absurd comments.</p>
			<p>They were reading the lines from Pushkin:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“The sun rises in a cold mist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The harvest-fields are silent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wolf goes out on the road</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his hungry mate.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Let us stop here,” said Peredonov. “This needs to be thoroughly understood. There’s an allegory concealed here. Wolves go in pairs, that is, the wolf with his hungry mate. The wolf is fed, but she is hungry. The wife should always eat after the husband. The wife should be subject to the husband in everything.”</p>
			<p>Pilnikov was in a cheerful mood, he smiled and looked at Peredonov with his elusively fine, dark eyes. Sasha’s face annoyed and yet attracted Peredonov. The cursed boy bewitched him with his artful smile.</p>
			<p>Was it really a boy? Or perhaps there were two of them: a brother and a sister. But it was difficult to tell who was there. Or perhaps it was even possible for him to change himself from a boy into a girl. There must be some reason for his being so clean⁠—when he changed his form he splashed in magical waters⁠—otherwise how could he transform himself? And he always smelt of scents.</p>
			<p>“What have you scented yourself with, Pilnikov?” asked Peredonov. “Was it patchkouli?”<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></p>
			<p>The boys laughed. Sasha grew red at the insult, but said nothing.</p>
			<p>Peredonov could not understand the disinterested desire to please, not to be repulsive to others. Every such manifestation, even on the part of a boy, he considered a design against himself. He who was neatly dressed evidently was trying to gain Peredonov’s favour. Otherwise, why should he go to so much trouble? Neatness and cleanliness were repulsive to Peredonov. Perfumes seemed to him to be bad smells. He preferred the stink of a manured field⁠—which he considered good for the health⁠—to all the perfumes of the world. To be neatly dressed, washed, clean, all this required time and labour; and the thought of labour depressed and dejected Peredonov. How good it would be to do nothing, and only eat, drink and sleep!</p>
			<p>Sasha’s companions teased him about his scenting himself with “patchkouli” and about Liudmillotchka’s being in love with him. This angered him, and he replied hotly that it was not true, she was not in love with him⁠—that it was all an invention of Peredonov, who had paid court to Liudmilla and had been snubbed; this was why he was angry with her and was spreading all sorts of evil rumours about her. His companions believed him⁠—they knew Peredonov⁠—but they did not stop teasing Sasha; it was such a pleasure to tease someone.</p>
			<p>Peredonov persisted in telling everyone about Pilnikov’s viciousness.</p>
			<p>“He’s got himself mixed up badly with Liudmillka,” he said.</p>
			<p>The townspeople gossiped of Liudmilla’s affection for the schoolboy in a greatly exaggerated way, and with stupid, unseemly details. But there were only a few who believed this: Peredonov had overdone it. Ill-natured people⁠—of whom there are not a few in our town⁠—asked Liudmilla:</p>
			<p>“What made you fall in love with a small boy? It’s an insult to the cavaliers of our town.”</p>
			<p>Liudmilla laughed and said:</p>
			<p>“Nonsense!”</p>
			<p>The townspeople regarded Sasha with ugly curiosity. Sasha sometimes reproached Liudmilla because he was teased about her. It even happened that he slapped her, because she laughed so loudly.</p>
			<p>To put an end to this stupid gossip, and to save Liudmilla from unpleasant scandal, all the Routilovs and their numerous friends and relatives acted against Peredonov and persuaded people that all his tales were the inventions of a madman. Peredonov’s wild actions compelled many people to believe this explanation.</p>
			<p>At the same time many denunciations of Peredonov were sent to the Director of the School District. From the District headquarters they sent an enquiry to the Head-Master. Khripatch referred them to his previous reports, and added that the further presence of Peredonov in the gymnasia was a positive danger, as his mental disease was visibly increasing.</p>
			<p>Peredonov was now entirely governed by wild illusions. The world was screened off from him by apparitions. His vacant, dull eyes wandered, and were unable to rest on objects as if he wanted to look beyond them on the other side of the objective world, and as if he sought for chinks of light between them.</p>
			<p>When he was alone he talked to himself and shouted senseless threats at some unknown person:</p>
			<p>“I will kill you! I will cut your throat! I’ll caulk you up!”</p>
			<p>Varvara listened with a smile.</p>
			<p>“Make all the row you want,” she thought malignantly.</p>
			<p>It seemed to her that it was only his rage; he must have guessed that they had fooled him and was angry. He wouldn’t go out of his mind⁠—a fool has no mind to go out of. And even if he did⁠—well, madness cheers the stupid!</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“Do you know, Ardalyon Borisitch,” said Khripatch, “you look very unwell?”</p>
			<p>“I have a headache,” said Peredonov morosely.</p>
			<p>“Do you know, my friend,” continued the Head-Master in a cautious voice, “I would advise you not to come to the gymnasia at present. You ought to attend to yourself⁠—to give a little attention to your nerves, which are obviously a little unstrung.”</p>
			<p>“Not come to the gymnasia. Of course,” thought Peredonov, “that’s the best thing to do. Why didn’t I think of it before! I’ll look ill, and stay at home and see what will come of it.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes, I’d better not come. I am rather unwell,” he said eagerly to Khripatch.</p>
			<p>At the same time Khripatch wrote again to the Head Office of the District and awaited from day to day the appointment of the physicians for an examination of Peredonov. But the officials were very leisurely. That was because they were officials.</p>
			<p>Peredonov did not go to the gymnasia and awaited something. During the last few days he had clung more and more to Volodin. Directly he opened his eyes in the morning Peredonov thought gloomily of Volodin: where was he now? Was he up to something? Sometimes he had visions of Volodin: clouds floated in the sky like a flock of sheep, and Volodin ran among them, bleating with laughter, with a bowler hat on his head; sometimes he floated by in the smoke issuing from the chimneys, making monstrous grimaces and leaping in the air.</p>
			<p>Volodin thought and told everyone with pride that Peredonov had recently taken a great fancy to him⁠—that Peredonov simply could not live without him.</p>
			<p>“Varvara has fooled him,” explained Volodin, “and he sees that I alone am his faithful friend⁠—that’s why he sticks to me.”</p>
			<p>When Peredonov went out of his house to look for Volodin, the other met him on the way in his bowler hat, with his stick, jumping along gaily and laughing his bleating laugh.</p>
			<p>“Why do you always wear a bowler?” Peredonov once asked him.</p>
			<p>“Well, why shouldn’t I wear a bowler, Ardalyon Borisitch?” replied Volodin gaily and shrewdly. “It’s modest and becoming. I’m not allowed to wear a cap with a badge, and as for a top-hat, let the aristocrats stick to it, it doesn’t become us.”</p>
			<p>“You’ll roast in your bowler,” said Peredonov morosely.</p>
			<p>Volodin sniggered.</p>
			<p>They went to Peredonov’s house.</p>
			<p>“One has to do so much walking,” complained Peredonov.</p>
			<p>“It’s good to take exercise, Ardalyon Borisitch,” said Volodin persuasively. “You work, you take a walk, you eat your meals, and you’re healthy.”</p>
			<p>“Well, yes,” said Peredonov, “do you think that in two or three hundred years from now people will have to work?”</p>
			<p>“What else is there to do? If you don’t work, you have no bread to eat. You buy bread with money and you have to earn the money.”</p>
			<p>“But I don’t want bread.”</p>
			<p>“But there wouldn’t be any rolls or tarts either,” said Volodin with a snigger. “No one would have any money to buy vodka, and there wouldn’t be anything to make liqueurs of.”</p>
			<p>“No, the people themselves won’t work,” said Peredonov. “There’ll be machines for everything⁠—all you’ll have to do is to turn a handle like an ariston<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a> and it’s ready. … But it would be a bore to turn it long.”</p>
			<p>Volodin lapsed into thought, lowered his head, stuck out his lips and said, reflectively:</p>
			<p>“Yes, that would be very good. Only none of us will live to see it.”</p>
			<p>Peredonov looked at him malignantly and grumbled:</p>
			<p>“You mean you won’t live to see it, but I shall.”</p>
			<p>“May God grant you,” said Volodin gaily, “to live two hundred years, and then to crawl on all fours for three hundred.”</p>
			<p>Peredonov no longer pronounced exorcisms⁠—let the worst come. He would triumph over everything; he had only to be on his guard and not yield.</p>
			<p>Once at home, sitting in the dining-room and drinking with Volodin, Peredonov told him about the Princess.</p>
			<p>The Princess, according to Peredonov, grew more decrepit and terrible from day to day; yellow, wrinkled, bent, tusked, evil, she incessantly haunted Peredonov.</p>
			<p>“She’s two hundred years old,” said Peredonov, looking strangely and gloomily before him, “and she wants me to make it up with her again. Until then she won’t give me a job.”</p>
			<p>“She certainly wants a good deal,” said Volodin shaking his head. “The old hag!”</p>
			<p>Peredonov brooded over murder. He said to Volodin, frowning savagely:</p>
			<p>“I’ve got one hidden behind the wall-paper. And I’m going to kill another under the floor.”</p>
			<p>But Volodin was not afraid, and kept on sniggering.</p>
			<p>“Do you smell the stench from behind the wall-paper?” asked Peredonov.</p>
			<p>“No, I don’t smell it,” said Volodin, still sniggering and grimacing.</p>
			<p>“Your nose is blocked up,” said Peredonov. “No wonder it’s gone red. It’s rotting there behind the wall-paper.”</p>
			<p>“A beetle!” exclaimed Varvara with a boisterous laugh. Peredonov looked dull and grave.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Peredonov became more and more engulfed in his madness, and began to write denunciations against the court cards, the nedotikomka, the Ram⁠—that he, the Ram, was an imposter who, representing Volodin, was aiming for a high position, but was in reality only a Ram; against the forest destroyers who cut down the birches, so that there were no twigs for Turkish baths, and that it was impossible to bring up children, because they left only the aspens, and what use were they?</p>
			<p>When he met the schoolboys in the street, Peredonov frightened the youngest and amused the older ones with his shameless and ridiculous words. The older ones walked after him in a crowd, scattering, however, when they saw one of the other masters; the younger ones ran away from him of their own accord.</p>
			<p>Peredonov saw enchantments and sorceries in everything. His hallucinations terrified him and forced from him senseless moans and squeals. The nedotikomka appeared to him now blood-like, now flaming; it groaned and it bellowed, and its bellowing split his head with an unendurable pain. The cat grew to terrible dimensions, stamped with high boots and turned into a huge red bewhiskered person.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
