<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Author’s Preface to the Second Russian Edition, 1908</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface-1908" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				Author’s Preface
				<span epub:type="subtitle">To the Second Russian Edition, 1908</span>
			</h2>
<p><i>This novel, "The Little Demon," was begun in</i> 1892 <i>and finished in</i>
1902. <i>It originally appeared in</i> 1905 <i>in the periodical "Voprosi
Zhizni," but without its final chapters. It was first published in its
complete form in March,</i> 1907, <i>in the "Shipovnik" edition.</i></p>
<p><i>There are two dissenting opinions among those I have seen expressed in
print as well as among those I have chanced to hear personally:</i></p>
<p><i>There are some who think that the author, being a very wicked man,
wished to draw his own portrait, and has represented himself in the
person of the instructor Peredonov. To judge from his frankness it
would appear that the author did not have the slightest wish to justify
or to idealise himself, and has painted his face in the blackest
colours. He has accomplished this rather astonishing undertaking in
order to ascend a kind of Golgotha, and to expiate his sins for some
reason or other. The result is an interesting and harmless novel.</i></p>
<p><i>Interesting, because it shows what wicked people there are in this
world. Harmless, because the reader can say: "This was not written
about me."</i></p>
<p><i>Others, more considerate toward the author, are of the opinion
that the Peredonovstchina portrayed in this novel is a sufficiently
widespread phenomenon.</i></p>
<p><i>Others go even further and say that if every one of us should examine
himself intently he would discover unmistakable traits of Peredonov</i>.</p>
<p><i>Of these two opinions I give preference to the one most agreeable to
me, namely, the second. I did not find it indispensable to create and
invent out of myself; all that is episodic, realistic, and psychologic
in any novel is based on very precise observation, and I found
sufficient "material" for my novel around me. And if my labours on this
novel have been rather prolonged, it has been in order to elevate to
necessity whatever is here by chance; so that the austere Ananke should
reign on the throne of Aisa, the prodigal scatterer of episodes.</i></p>
<p><i>It is true that people love to be loved. They are pleased with the
portrayal of the nobler, loftier aspects of the soul. Even in villains
they want to see a spark of nobility, "the divine spark," as people
used to say in the old days. That is why they do not want to believe
the picture that confronts them when it is true, exact, gloomy, and
evil. They say: "It is not about me."</i></p>
<p><i>No, my dear contemporaries, it is of you that I have written my novel,
about the Little Demon and his dreadful Nedotikomka, about Ardalyon
and Varvara Peredonov, Pavel Volodin, Darya, Liudmilla, and Valeria
Routilov, Aleksandr Pilnikov and the others. About you.</i></p>
<p><i>This novel is a mirror—very skilfully made. I have spent a long time
in polishing it, I have laboured over it zealously.</i></p>
<p><i>The surface of my mirror is pure. It has been remeasured again and
again, and most carefully verified; it has not a single blemish.</i></p>
<p><i>The monstrous and the beautiful are reflected in it with equal
precision.</i></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
